Welcome to this video, where you will be introduced
to the basics of apps. After watching this video, you will be able to
define a mobile app, outline the evolution of
mobile app development, describe common characteristics
of a mobile app, and identify the role
of a mobile developer. In this digital world, applications or apps are an integral part
of our daily life. We use apps to shop, play games, order food, book travel tickets, health and fitness,
and many more. But what exactly is an app? An app is a software with a specific purpose that you can install and run on a computer, smartphone, or other
electronic devices. For example, Microsoft Office is an app that you can
install on your computer. Wondering what mobile apps are? Mobile apps are a subset of apps that run on mobile devices. They can run independently without any need for
the device to be connected to a network or be enabled by the
connectivity to the internet. Some common examples
of mobile apps include calculator,
flashlight, and maps. Let's briefly review
the evolution of mobile app development. The first smart phone, Simon, was launched
by IBM in 1994, with apps like Calculator
app, Clock app, Games apps, and other basic
utility applications. Blackberry then became
a market leader, offering many more
preloaded applications. Apple iPhone was a game changer. Launched in 2007,
and within a year, it had the next version
with over 200 apps. In 2008, Google released
Android with basic Google apps. IPad was released with
11,000 apps in 2010. There are more than
four million apps catering to a
multitude of devices. Next, let's review some
common characteristics of mobile apps that
make them easy to use. Mobile apps work
on mobile devices, which include smartphones, such as iPhones and Android phones. Tablets, such as iPad, Samsung Tab, Amazon Fire, and Microsoft Surface Pro. Wearable devices,
such as Apple Watch, Samsung Watch, Garmin vivoactive, and other smartwatches. Automobile infotainment
devices, such as Apple CarPlay, Android Auto, Ford Sync, and Tesla infotainment,
and e-readers like Kindle. The list of mobile devices continues to grow with
technological advancements. Every mobile app has
a user interface, which includes buttons,
menus, icons, and so on. In addition, users can
personalize the app. For example, the app
may provide options to set up the preferred language
and the color scheme. Most apps provide a help
functionality that makes it easy for users to look for
specific items in the app. Several apps provide
notification features that provide real-time
updates about any event or updates about fixes or newer versions of the
app and other activities. In addition, most apps
are built with features, keeping in mind inclusive
user experience. Some examples for
such features include embedded screen readers and voice-activated app navigation. While an app might have
various characteristics, it might work only on
one type of device, such as an Android smartphone. Such an app is referred
to as a native app. However, there are other apps that might work across
various device types. Such apps are called
cross-platform apps. Even if the view
of the mobile apps may appear identical
across devices, they can be entirely different
software applications. This is where the
mobile app developer comes in with
specialized skills, including specific
languages, frameworks, and tools that are used
to develop mobile apps. The mobile app developer
is responsible for writing the required code to add the required
interactions in the app. In this video, you learned that a mobile app
is a software with a specific purpose that you can install and run on
mobile devices. Mobile apps work on mobile devices, including
smartphones, tablets, wearable devices, automobile
infotainment devices, and e-readers like Kindle. Users can personalize the app. Apps can provide different
functionality like help, notification, and
inclusive user experience. Apps may be designed to work on one or multiple device types, and a mobile app developer is a software developer
with specialized skills, including specific
languages, frameworks, and tools used in
mobile app development.